Quick doc on how to add a new type to SerDe (#391)
dotnet/spark: docs/coding-guidelines/add-types-to-SerDe.md

# Add New Types to Serialization and Deserializaiton

This how-to provides general instructions on how to add new types to serialization and deserialization between CLR (Common Language Runtime) and JVM (Java virtual machine). The IPC (Inter-process communication) mechanism between the CLR and the JVM uses serialization to communicate. Each type has a type identifier and then an optional length followed by the actual data.

Not every type has been implemented so if you need to use a type that isn't supported and you get the error "Type {0} not supported yet", you will need to implement the type.

## Steps to follow

### 1. Choose a new type identifier and add it to:

> https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/PayloadHelper.cs#L20

Author: removed the url (think you mean that and not the ### 1. line

> https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/PayloadHelper.cs#L20

Reviewer: That's correct. I meant to remove the url. Thanks!

Example:

```csharp

    private static readonly byte[] s_doubleArrayArrayTypeId = new[] { ( byte)'A' };z

> ```

Reviewer: Can you remove the empty lines and adjust the indentation? Also please remove `z` in the end.

Once you have created your new identifier implement the csharp side writer in PayloadHelper.cs by 
finding the method `ConvertArgsToBytes` and find out where in the switch that the code should be 
implemented.

This is how a byte array is written:

```csharp

    case double[][] argDoubleArrayArray:
        SerDe.Write(destination, s_doubleArrayArrayTypeId);
        SerDe.Write(destination, argDoubleArrayArray.Length);
        foreach (double[] doubleArray in argDoubleArrayArray)
        {
            SerDe.Write(destination, doubleArray.Length);
            foreach (double d in doubleArray)
            {
                SerDe.Write(destination, d);
            }
        }
        break;

> ```

Reviewer: Can you remove the empty lines and adjust the indentation?

Typically the type identifier is written, then the length and then the data. Once you have written 

> the code that will perform the write you need to add a case to `GetTypeId` for your new identifier:

Reviewer: Can you merge these into one line?

```csharp

    if (type == typeof(int[]) ||
        type == typeof(long[]) ||
        type == typeof(double[]) ||
        type == typeof(double[][]) ||
        typeof(IEnumerable<byte[]>).IsAssignableFrom(type) ||
        typeof(IEnumerable<string>).IsAssignableFrom(type))
    {
        return s_arrayTypeId;
    }

> ```

Reviewer: Can you remove the empty lines and adjust the indentation?

### 2. Derserialize this new type in JVM with read method

In [SerDe.scala](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/scala/microsoft-spark-2.3.x/src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala) (This need to be changed in all Spark version 2.3.x, 2.4.x and 3.0.x). 

In either the method `readTypedObject` or `readList` add a new case statement for your new type 

> identifier:

Reviewer: Let's merge these into one line together.

```scala

  case 'A' => readDoubleArrArr(dis)

> ```

Reviewer: Can you remove the empty lines and adjust the indentation?

Once you have read the type, you can implement your method to read the data you wrote in csharp, examples:

```scala

   def readDoubleArrArr(in: DataInputStream): Array[Array[Double]] = {
    val len = readInt(in)
    (0 until len).map(_ => readDoubleArr(in)).toArray
  }

> ```

Reviewer: Can you remove the empty lines and adjust the indentation?

That should be everything you need to be able to send a new type from the CLR to the JVM.

### 3. Serialize this new type in JVM with write method

> In src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala the function `writeObject` contains a switch for each type, a couple of examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [SerDe.scala](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/scala/microsoft-spark-2.3.x/src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala) (This need to be changed in all Spark version 2.3.x, 2.4.x and 3.0.x), the function `writeObject` contains a switch for each type, a couple of examples:
```

> 

Reviewer: How about adding `case "doublearray" => dos.writeByte('A')` also in this section?

```scala

 case "[[D" =>
  writeType(dos, "list")
  writeDoubleArrArr(dos, value.asInstanceOf[Array[Array[Double]]])

> ```

Reviewer: Can you remove the empty lines and adjust the indentation?

> 

Reviewer: How about adding the following write function also?
```
def writeDoubleArrArr(out: DataOutputStream, value: Array[Array[Double]]): Unit = {
    writeType(out, "doublearray")
    out.writeInt(value.length)
    value.foreach(v => writeDoubleArr(out, v))
}
```

> ### 4. Add this new type in [JvmBridge.cs](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs#L151) to read the value on CLR side

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4. Add this new type in [JvmBridge.cs](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs) to read the value on CLR side
```

> The final step is to be able to read the value on the CLR side that the JVM side has written. Back in csharp find csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs add your type identifier to `CallJavaMethod` in the switch statement `switch (typeAsChar) //TODO: Add support for other types.` You will likely find that the type you want to implement should be implemented inside `ReadCollection`.

Reviewer: Let's add the [sample code](https://github.com/GoEddie/spark/blob/1968f59c22df9808ab210fa7bf94ab5cdd48a9f2/src/csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs#L368) here as an example.

# Add New Types to Serialization and Deserializaiton

This how-to provides general instructions on how to add new types to serialization and deserialization between CLR (Common Language Runtime) and JVM (Java virtual machine). The IPC (Inter-process communication) mechanism between the CLR and the JVM uses serialization to communicate. Each type has a type identifier and then an optional length followed by the actual data.

Not every type has been implemented so if you need to use a type that isn't supported and you get the error "Type {0} not supported yet", you will need to implement the type.

## Steps to follow
Please see the following E2E example of how the new type `DoubleArrayArray` is added to serialization and deserialization between CLR and JVM.

### 1. Choose a new type identifier and add it in [PayloadHelper.cs](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/PayloadHelper.cs) on CLR side

Example:

```csharp

> private static readonly byte[] s_doubleArrayArrayTypeId = new[] { ( byte)'A' };z

Reviewer: ```suggestion
private static readonly byte[] s_doubleArrayArrayTypeId = new[] { ( byte)'A' };
```

    SerDe.Write(destination, argDoubleArrayArray.Length);
    foreach (double[] doubleArray in argDoubleArrayArray)
    {
        SerDe.Write(destination, doubleArray.Length);
        foreach (double d in doubleArray)
        {
            SerDe.Write(destination, d);
        }
    }
    break;
```

Typically the type identifier is written, then the length and then the data. Once you have written the code that will perform the write you need to add a case to `GetTypeId` for your new identifier:

```csharp
if (type == typeof(int[]) ||
    type == typeof(long[]) ||
    type == typeof(double[]) ||
    type == typeof(double[][]) ||
    typeof(IEnumerable<byte[]>).IsAssignableFrom(type) ||
    typeof(IEnumerable<string>).IsAssignableFrom(type))
{
    return s_arrayTypeId;
}
```

### 2. Derserialize this new type in JVM with read method

In [SerDe.scala](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/scala/microsoft-spark-2.3.x/src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala) (This need to be changed in all Spark version 2.3.x, 2.4.x and 3.0.x). 

In either the method `readTypedObject` or `readList` add a new case statement for your new type 
identifier:

> 

Reviewer: Can we remove these redundant sentences before merging it? Thanks!

> 

Reviewer 2: @GoEddie can you address this comment?

```scala
case 'A' => readDoubleArrArr(dis)
```

Once you have read the type, you can implement your method to read the data you wrote in csharp, examples:

```scala
def readDoubleArrArr(in: DataInputStream): Array[Array[Double]] = {
  val len = readInt(in)
  (0 until len).map(_ => readDoubleArr(in)).toArray
}
```

That should be everything you need to be able to send a new type from the CLR to the JVM.

### 3. Serialize this new type in JVM with write method

In [SerDe.scala](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/scala/microsoft-spark-2.3.x/src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala) (This need to be changed in all Spark version 2.3.x, 2.4.x and 3.0.x), the function `writeObject` contains a switch for each type:

```scala
case "[[D" =>
  writeType(dos, "list")
  writeDoubleArrArr(dos, value.asInstanceOf[Array[Array[Double]]])
```

and 

```scala
def writeDoubleArrArr(out: DataOutputStream, value: Array[Array[Double]]): Unit = {
    writeType(out, "doublearray")
    out.writeInt(value.length)
    value.foreach(v => writeDoubleArr(out, v))
}
```

`WriteType` also needs to know how to write the specific type identifier:

```scala

> case "doublearray" => dos.writeByte('A'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
case "doublearray" => dos.writeByte('A')
```

```

### 4. Add this new type in [JvmBridge.cs](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs) to read the value on CLR side

> The final step is to be able to read the value on the CLR side that the JVM side has written. Back in csharp find csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs add your type identifier to `CallJavaMethod` in the switch statement `switch (typeAsChar) //TODO: Add support for other types.` You will likely find that the type you want to implement should be implemented inside `ReadCollection`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final step is to be able to read the value on the CLR side that the JVM side has written. Add your type identifier to `CallJavaMethod` in the switch statement `switch (typeAsChar) //TODO: Add support for other types.` in [JvmBridge.cs](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs). You will likely find that the type you want to implement should be implemented inside `ReadCollection`.

Add new type identifier for `DoubleArrayArray` as below:
```

```

Once you have created your new identifier implement the csharp side writer in PayloadHelper.cs by finding the method `ConvertArgsToBytes` and find out where in the switch that the code should be implemented.

This is how a byte array is written:

```csharp
case double[][] argDoubleArrayArray:
    SerDe.Write(destination, s_doubleArrayArrayTypeId);
    SerDe.Write(destination, argDoubleArrayArray.Length);
    foreach (double[] doubleArray in argDoubleArrayArray)
    {
        SerDe.Write(destination, doubleArray.Length);
        foreach (double d in doubleArray)
        {
            SerDe.Write(destination, d);
        }
    }
    break;
```

Typically the type identifier is written, then the length and then the data. Once you have written the code that will perform the write you need to add a case to `GetTypeId` for your new identifier:

```csharp
if (type == typeof(int[]) ||
    type == typeof(long[]) ||
    type == typeof(double[]) ||
    type == typeof(double[][]) ||
    typeof(IEnumerable<byte[]>).IsAssignableFrom(type) ||
    typeof(IEnumerable<string>).IsAssignableFrom(type))
{
    return s_arrayTypeId;
}
```

### 2. Derserialize this new type in JVM with read method

> In [SerDe.scala](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/scala/microsoft-spark-2.3.x/src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala) (This need to be changed in all Spark version 2.3.x, 2.4.x and 3.0.x), add a new case statement for your new type identifier in either `readTypedObject` or `readList` method depending on the new type:

Reviewer 2: nit: This needs

In either the method `readTypedObject` or `readList` add a new case statement for your new type 
identifier:

```scala
case 'A' => readDoubleArrArr(dis)
```

Once you have read the type, you can implement your method to read the data you wrote in csharp, examples:

```scala
def readDoubleArrArr(in: DataInputStream): Array[Array[Double]] = {
  val len = readInt(in)
  (0 until len).map(_ => readDoubleArr(in)).toArray
}
```

That should be everything you need to be able to send a new type from the CLR to the JVM.

### 3. Serialize this new type in JVM with write method

> In [SerDe.scala](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/scala/microsoft-spark-2.3.x/src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala) (This need to be changed in all Spark version 2.3.x, 2.4.x and 3.0.x), the function `writeObject` contains a switch for each type:

Reviewer 2: nit: This needs

    private static readonly byte[] s_jvmObjectTypeId = new[] { (byte)'j' };
    private static readonly byte[] s_byteArrayTypeId = new[] { (byte)'r' };
    private static readonly byte[] s_arrayTypeId = new[] { (byte)'l' };
    private static readonly byte[] s_dictionaryTypeId = new[] { (byte)'e' };
    private static readonly byte[] s_rowArrTypeId = new[] { (byte)'R' };

```

Once you have created your new identifier implement the csharp side writer in PayloadHelper.cs by 
finding the method `ConvertArgsToBytes` and find out where in the switch that the code should be 
implemented.

This is how a byte array is written:

```csharp

    if (addTypeIdPrefix)
    {
        SerDe.Write(destination, GetTypeId(argType));
    }

...

    case byte[] argByteArray:
        SerDe.Write(destination, argByteArray.Length);
        SerDe.Write(destination, argByteArray);
        break;

```

Typically the type identifier is written, then the length and then the data. Once you have written 
the code that will perform the write you need to add a case to `GetTypeId` for your new identifier:

```csharp

    case TypeCode.Double:
        return s_doubleTypeId;

```

> The next step is to add the derserialization code to scala (read code).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. Derserialize this new type in JVM with read method

> In src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala (These are versioned so you may need to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [SerDe.scala](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/scala/microsoft-spark-2.3.x/src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala) (This need to be changed in all Spark version 2.3.x, 2.4.x and 3.0.x). In the method `readTypedObject` add a new case statement for your new type 
identifier:
```

try and find it). In the method `readTypedObject` add a new case statement for your new type 

> identifier:

Reviewer: Please write this in one line.

```scala

def readTypedObject(dis: DataInputStream, dataType: Char): Object = {
    dataType match {
      case 'n' => null
      case 'i' => new java.lang.Integer(readInt(dis))
      case 'g' => new java.lang.Long(readLong(dis))
      case 'd' => new java.lang.Double(readDouble(dis))
      case 'b' => new java.lang.Boolean(readBoolean(dis))
      case 'c' => readString(dis)
      case 'e' => readMap(dis)
      case 'r' => readBytes(dis)
      case 'l' => readList(dis)
      case 'D' => readDate(dis)
      case 't' => readTime(dis)
      case 'j' => JVMObjectTracker.getObject(readString(dis))
      case 'R' => readRowArr(dis)
      case _ => throw new IllegalArgumentException(s"Invalid type $dataType")
    }
  }

> ```

Reviewer: Can you please show one example to be consistent with E2E example? e.g. `DoubleArrayArray`.

Once you have read the type, you can implement your method to read the data you wrote in csharp, examples:

```scala

  def readBoolean(in: DataInputStream): Boolean = {
    in.readBoolean()
  }

  def readRow(in: DataInputStream): Row = {
    val len = readInt(in)
    Row.fromSeq((0 until len).map(_ => readObject(in)))
  }

  def readBytesArr(in: DataInputStream): Array[Array[Byte]] = {
    val len = readInt(in)
    (0 until len).map(_ => readBytes(in)).toArray
  }

> ```

Reviewer: Can you please show one example to be consistent with E2E example? e.g. `DoubleArrayArray`.

> That should be everything you need to be able to send a new type from the CLR to the JVM but we now

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That should be everything you need to be able to send a new type from the CLR to the JVM.
```

>  need to write back from the JVM to the CLR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## 3. Serialize this new type in JVM with write method

In src/main/scala/org/apache/spark/api/dotnet/SerDe.scala the function `writeObject` contains a 
switch for each type, a couple of examples:

```scala

    case "int" | "java.lang.Integer" =>
        writeType(dos, "integer")
        writeInt(dos, value.asInstanceOf[Int])

    case "java.sql.Timestamp" =>
          writeType(dos, "time")
          writeTime(dos, value.asInstanceOf[Timestamp])

    case "[D" =>
          writeType(dos, "list")
          writeDoubleArr(dos, value.asInstanceOf[Array[Double]])

```

```scala

 def writeInt(out: DataOutputStream, value: Int): Unit = {
    out.writeInt(value)
  }

 def writeTime(out: DataOutputStream, value: Time): Unit = {
    out.writeDouble(value.getTime.toDouble / 1000.0)
  }

 def writeDoubleArr(out: DataOutputStream, value: Array[Double]): Unit = {
    writeType(out, "double")
    out.writeInt(value.length)
    value.foreach(v => out.writeDouble(v))
  }

> ```

Reviewer: Can you please show one example to be consistent with E2E example? e.g. `DoubleArrayArray`.

> The final step is to be able to read the value on the CLR side that the JVM side has written. Back 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 4. Add this new type in [JvmBridge.cs](https://github.com/dotnet/spark/blob/master/src/csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs#L151) to read the value on CLR side
```

> in csharp find csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs add your type identifier to 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The final step is to be able to read the value on the CLR side that the JVM side has written. Back in csharp find csharp/Microsoft.Spark/Interop/Ipc/JvmBridge.cs add your type identifier to `CallJavaMethod` in the switch statement `switch (typeAsChar) //TODO: Add support for other types.` You will likely find that the type you want to implement should be implemented inside `ReadCollection`.
```

`CallJavaMethod` in the switch statement `switch (typeAsChar) //TODO: Add support for other types.`
you will likely find that the type you want to implement should be implemented inside 

> `ReadCollection`.

Reviewer: Please write these in one line.
